# Initial steps towards codegen support

The next implementation task is to add support for basic code generation.
There's a reasonable amount of boilerplate code needed to do this, which means 
most of the difficulty comes from identifying the minimal set of needed 
support code. A truly minimal starting point would be to implement codegen for 
a function with no argument that returns void. However, the incremental 
difficulty of supporting code-gen for simple arithmetic operations is very low 
and doing that extra work gives much greater assurance that the implementation 
is correct. Therefore, start by implementing support for the RV32I ALU 
operations.

## An overview of newly added support code

* RISCVAsmPrinter and RISCVMCInstLower
  * Responsible for converting a MachineInstr to an MCInst. This is handled by 
  `llvm::LowerRISCVMachineInstrToMCInst` which simply sets the opcode and adds 
  corresponding MCOperands for register or immediate operands for the input 
  MachineInstr.
* RISCVInstrInfo
  * At this stage, requires no hand-written code. RISCVInstrInfo.{h,cpp} 
  include RISCVGenInstrInfo.inc which is generated from RISCVInstrInfo.td.
  This defines an enum containing all defined RISCV instructions, e.g.
  `RISCV::ADDI`.
* RISCVRegisterInfo
  * Just like RISCVInstrInfo, this is heavily reliant on table-generated code.
  * We need to pass the return address register to the RISCVGenRegisterInfo 
  constructor.
  * getReservedRegs must indicate all registers which should be considered 
  reserved and so ignored by the register allocator.
  * getFrameRegister simply returns the register used for frame indices. Given 
  we are yet to implement frame pointer elimination, always return RISCV::X8.
  * eliminateFrameIndex needs to be present, but for now it's just a stub that 
  calls `report_fatal_error`.
* RISCVSubtarget
  * Contains a number of accessors for instances of the classes we've 
  implemented. e.g. `getFrameLowering`, `getInstrInfo`, `getRegisterInfo`, 
  `getTargetLowering` and so on.
* RISCVPassConfig
* RISCVISelDAGToDAG
  * This is responsible for selecting an appropriate RISC-V instruction for 
  each SelectionDAG node. `RISCVDAGToDAGISel::Select` is the main entry point 
  for this process, which simply calls the tablegenerated `SelectCode` 
  function. See below for details on specifying patterns which control this 
  process.
* RISCVISelLowering
  * Ultimately lowers LLVM code into the SelectionDAG. The majority of the 
  code which performs this transformation is target independent, and we just 
  need to implement a few hooks to influence this process. See below for more 
  details.

## Specifying patterns in RISCVInstrInfo.td

The RISC-V backend structures RISCVInstrInfo.td so instruction selection 
patterns are specified separately from the instruction definitions. A pattern 
for add can be trivially specified:

    def : Pat<(add GPR:$rs1, GPR:$rs2), (ADD GPR:$rs1, GPR:$rs2)>;

The first parameter to Pat specifies the SelectionDAG node to match. See 
`include/llvm/Target/TargetSelectionDAG.td` for a full listing of such nodes.
The second parameter specifies the RISC-V instruction(s) to lower it to.

The register-immediate form of add (`addi`) can be matched as below:

    def : Pat<(add GPR:$rs1, simm12:$imm12), (ADDI GPR:$rs1, simm12:$imm12)>;

Note that to lower ADDI we are matching the same SelectionDAG node (`add`) but 
with different constraints - the immediate operand. The LLVM SelectionDAG 
infrastructure will handle checking the preconditions for each pattern. For 
the above pattern to work, `simm12` must also be constrained in a way that can 
be understood by SelectionDAG. We make it derive from `ImmLeaf` in addition to 
`Operand`, as it was before:

    def simm12 : Operand<XLenVT>, ImmLeaf<XLenVT, [{return isInt<12>(Imm);}]> {
    ...
    }

## RISCVISelLowering

The constructor calls several helper functions which influence lowering.
Importantly, `addRegisterClass(XLenVT, &RISCV::GPRRegClass);` will ensure that 
`XLenVT` (`i32` for RV32) is considered a legal type. Future patches will add 
more code, for instance specifying which operations should be expanded into 
semantic equivalents rather than attempting to lower them directly.

The two key methods to implement at this stage are `LowerFormalArguments` and 
`LowerReturn`. The former will determine which registers each argument is 
passed in, and create an appropriate virtual register. `LowerReturn` will copy 
the return value into the register appropriate for the target calling 
convention.

<!-- More info on RISCVISD::RET_FLAG --!>

## Specifying the calling convention

At this stage, we won't attempt to support the full detail of the [RISC-V 
calling 
convention](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-elf-psabi-doc/blob/master/riscv-elf.md).  
Instead, specify the basic register assignments in RISCVCallingConv.td:

		// RISCV 32-bit C return-value convention.
		def RetCC_RISCV32 : CallingConv<[CCIfType<[i32], CCAssignToReg<[X10, X11]>>]>;

		// RISCV 32-bit C Calling convention.
		def CC_RISCV32 : CallingConv<[
			// Promote i8/i16 args to i32
			CCIfType<[ i8, i16 ], CCPromoteToType<i32>>,

			// All arguments get passed in integer registers if there is space.
			CCIfType<[i32], CCAssignToReg<[ X10, X11, X12, X13, X14, X15, X16, X17]>>,

			// Could be assigned to the stack in 8-byte aligned units, but unsupported
			CCAssignToStack<8, 8>
		]>;

This will generate `CC_RISCV32` and `RetCC_RISCV32` functions which you can make us of in RISCVISelLowering.cpp.

Also list the callee-saved registers:

		def CSR : CalleeSavedRegs<(add X1, X3, X4, X8, X9, (sequence "X%u", 18, 27))>;

## Specifying tests

Tests for the MC layer were written in `test/MC/RISCV` and utilised 
`FileCheck`. You can write tests using `FileCheck` again for codegen, placing 
them in `test/CodeGen/RISCV`. These tests take the form of simple functions 
written in LLVM IR, and include checks on the generated assembly after 
compilation with `llc`. I strongly recommend the use of 
`update_llc_test_checks.py` to automate the generation of check lines.

